On Wed, Sep 28, 2022, 08:36 John S. Quarterman <***@***> wrote:

 Thanks for the inquiry.

 And thanks for digging into Internet history; it's always interesting to
 see new material dug up.

 I'm not sure what you're getting at with your "stated without citation."
 I didn't see any reason to cite my own opinion which I previously also wrote.
 Most likely if you dig back in issues of Matrix News you'll find even
 earlier versions.

 After your question "Why didn't he just stick with that?"

 I had to reread several times to convince myself you weren't attributing
 the Japan Information Highway article to me. Could you please clarify by
 saying something like "text by others".

 To directly answer your question, The Matrix is a history and policy book.
 The other two you quote are, as their titles indicate, about technical
 aspects of how to use the stuff. History was not the main point of those
 books. As you say, "these statements are small buried passages in much
 larger, often dry technical works." These particular statements were not
 intended to be complete histories of the origins of the ARPANET. They are
 indeed a bit too condensed.

 I am puzzled by your characterization, "This ARPANET is one step removed
 from nuclear war planning narrative".

 First of all, that doesn't seem to be what you are objecting to. Earlier,
 you wrote: "was *designed from the start* to withstand a nuclear attack."

 Secondly, you documented the one step removed in your
 quotes from "Recommendation to the air staff" by RAND, from August 1965."
 See also below about Licklider: RAND is not the only connection between
 nuclear war planning and ARPA and the ARPANET..

 Yes, I am and was well aware that the principal purpose of ARPANET and the
 Internet is resource sharing. There was no real need to spell that out of
 the readers of those two books, because they were reading them to learn how
 to implement that. But that is not the whole story, as you have started
 discovering. Why was resource sharing on peoples' minds back then? And
 where did the money come from?

 Bruce Sterling's writeup is not wrong. Sure, it's better than my shorthand
 blurb in those two books. My error is in the "ARPA was charged with". No,
 not exactly..

 You may want to ask Bruce if he read "Recommendation to the air staff". I
 wouldn't be surprised if he did; he does pretty thorough research.

 Also, it's a bit unfair to characterize Bruce among "fabulists trying to
 tell compelling stories." That piece was history, not fiction.

 However, remember that ARPA funding was from Navy money. So while
 everybody working on ARPANET most likely was working on resource sharing,
 if you want to dig, it would be interesting to find out if in the ARPA
 funding allocation discussions what else was used for justification. It
 wouldn't be the first time researchers were busily working on a virtuous
 project that was being funded for different reasons. Let me know if you dig
 into that.

 You don't mention Licklider or his work at the Pentagon. See Sharon
 Weinberger <https://aeon.co/users/sharon-weinberger>, "Web of War," Aeon,
 extract from a 2017 book.

 https://aeon.co/essays/how-nuclear-fears-helped-inspire-creation-of-the-internet
 For example:
 "Licklider was well aware of the Pentagon's interest in command and
 control of nuclear weapons. One of his early descriptions for work on
 computer networking referenced the need to link computers that would be
 part of the nascent National Military Command System used to control
 nuclear weapons. His vision was for something much broader, however. When
 he met with Jack Ruina, the head of ARPA, and Eugene Fubini, one of Brown's
 deputies, Licklider pitched interactive computing to them. Rather than
 focusing strictly on technologies to improve command and control, he wanted
 to transform the way people worked with computers. "Who can direct a battle
 when he's got to write a program in the middle of that battle?" Licklider
 asked."

 You ask: "where did people like Gilster and Quarterman get this idea?"

 I have no idea about Gilster.

 As for me, I don't rightly recall, it was long common wisdom. Since I
 worked at BBN, which was full of MIT people who knew Licklider, I would
 guess it was some derivation of Licklider's Pentagon and ARPA work. Whose
 work shows that there were indeed Cold War nuclear bomb roots of the
 ARPANET, even though that network was not directly designed to survive a
 nuclear attack.

 Errata: You mention NIRPNET. Maybe you mean NIPRnet.
 In the same sentence, it's should be its.

 You note: "If you click through the above article you'll see a linguistic
 phenomena: It's called Internet without the word "the" preceding it. This
 was pretty common through about 1994. "I'm on Internet" sounds weird to us
 but say, "I'm on AOL" does not - and that was basically the logic. It gets
 deeper. For instance, it's called "The Usenet" in the article and we
 actually would drop the "the" on that word today just like we do with
 "ARPANET", or how it used to be stylized, "ARPAnet". This history needs its
 own atticle as well."

 (Typo: atticle should be article.)

 Yes, please write an article about Internet as a proper name. Including
 the neo-logism internet without a capital, which is irritating, because
 while there are indeed disconnected small-i internets, there is only one
 Internet with a capital I.

 Got to go prepare for a hurricane. Thanks again for your research. -jsq

